Introducing cube functionality to kartothek  blogpost (#38)
JDASoftwareGroup/jdatech.github.io: _posts/2020-07-21-cube-functionality-to-kartothek.markdown

*	**Explicit physical Partitions**: We have decided for explicit physical partitions since we have seen that this data model works well for our current data flow. 
It allows quick and efficient re-partitioning to allow row-based, group-based, and timeseries-based data processing steps, while keeping the technical complexity rather low (compared to an automatic + dynamic partitioning).
It also maps well to multiple backends we planned to use.
*	**Update Granularity Partition-wise**: Entire partitions can overwrite old physical partitions. Deletion operations are partition-wise.
*	**Seed-Based Join System / Partition-alignment**: When data is stored in multiple parts (tables or datasets), the question is how to expose it to the user during read operations.
 Seed based Join marks a single part as seed which provides seed dataset in the cube, all other parts are just additional columns.
 Cube uses lazy approach of seed based join, 
 since it better supports independent copies and backups of datasets and also simplifies some of our processing pipelines (e.g. geolocation data can blindly be fetched for too many locations and dates.)	

> ## Dask And Yamal Support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Backend Support
```

And also remove "Yamal" from the feature table below.

Author: done

The following features are supported by different backends:

| Feature | Eager | Dask.Bag | Dask.DataFrame |	Yamal |
| :-------: | :-----: | :--------: | :--------------: | :-----: |

> | Build	  |    yes    |    yes     |      yes         |   yes   |

Reviewer: Would be nice if the table would be readable in source code as well (aka being aligned)

Author: done.

| Extend  |	 yes  |	  yes	 |     yes        |	 yes  |
| Remove  |  yes  |   no	 |     no         |   no  |
| Append  |  yes  |   yes	 |     yes        |	 yes  |
| Delete  |  yes  |   yes    |     no         |  yes  |
| Copy	  |  yes  |   yes    |	   no         |	 yes  |
| Query	  |  yes  |   yes    |	   yes        |  yes  |
| Stats	  |  yes  |   yes	 |     no	      |  yes  |
| Cleanup |	 yes  |   yes    |	   no         |  yes  |
| ------- | ----- | -------- | -------------- | ----- |

## New Features to Kartothek :
Kartothek features a **command line interface (CLI)** for some cube operations. 

> To use it, create a  **skv.yml** file that describes storefact stores and use commands to gather information of the required cube.

Reviewer: What should be part of the `skv.yml`? Maybe cross-reference [storefact](https://github.com/JDASoftwareGroup/storefact/) since this is where the store descriptions come from.

Author: done.

Here we use geodata cube to get some information.

> ```python

Reviewer: This code section isn't python but shell.

Author: Since the code is in python, thought of adding it so.. referred to kartothek Blog as well. Please reply, if still I need to change it to shell.

Reviewer: The example code you're showing is not in Python. It is an example of the CLI, which is used from the shell.

Author: okay..updated it.

*	**Multiple-datasets**: When mapping multiple parts (tables or datasets) to Kartothek, using multiple datasets allows users to copy, backup and delete them separately. 
Index structures are bound to datasets.
*	**Seed-Based Join System / Partition-alignment**: When data is stored in multiple parts (tables or datasets), the question is how to expose it to the user during read operations.
 Seed based Join marks a single part as seed which provides seed dataset in the cube, all other parts are just additional columns.
 Cube uses lazy approach of seed based join, 
 since it better supports independent copies and backups of datasets and also simplifies some of our processing pipelines (e.g. geolocation data can blindly be fetched for too many locations and dates.)	

## Command Line Interface (CLI)
Kartothek features a **command line interface (CLI)** for some cube operations. 
To use it, create a  **skv.yml** file that describes [storefact](https://github.com/JDASoftwareGroup/storefact) stores and use commands to gather information of the required cube.

Sample skv.yml:
```
dataset:
   type: hfs
   path: path/to/data
```

Here we use **geodata** cube to get some information.
```shell

> >>>kartothek_cube geodata info  (gives geodata cube info)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kartothek_cube geodata info  # gives geodata cube info
```

- `>>>` isn't needed for shell
- use proper shell comment syntax

Same goes for the other lines

Author: Updated in the markdown file.

>>>kartothek_cube geodata stats  (for cube scan)
>>>kartothek_cube --help  (To get list of  ktk_cube commands)
```

## Outlook

> TODO:What features are coming up next ??

Reviewer: ```markdown
- **API cleanup:** The API surface of kartothek grow organically over the years and we plan to re-design it. While doing so, we will incorporate our learnings regarding API design and will also prune some features that are not needed anymore or that did not match their expectations (e.g. the original multi-table design).
- **Ecosystem integration:** At this point in time, there are multiple dataset formats (e.g. [Apache Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/dataset.html), [Apache Iceberg](https://iceberg.apache.org/), [Delta Lake](https://delta.io/)) and we will investigate how to evolve kartothek as a library and as a format to align better with the ecosystem and enable new features (like schema migrations and time travel), while providing the stability and safety that our users require
- **Query Planning:** Currently the kartothek query planner solely relies on file-level information (file names for primary indices and separate index files for secondary indices). It would be great to also use the RowGroup-level statistics as specified in [Apache Parquet](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format) to improve query performance. We will have a look at [the work Dask already did](https://github.com/dask/dask/blob/55445565c3746f97f2bc50d5628a484576cef90e/dask/dataframe/io/parquet/core.py) in this area.
```

Author: Added this content to outlook.

---
layout: single
title:  "Introducing Cube Functionality To Kartothek"
date:   2020-07-21 06:00:00 +0500
tags: technology python data-engineering
header:
  overlay_image: assets/images/tech_gear_banner.jpg
  overlay_filter: 0.2
  show_overlay_excerpt: false

> author: Marco Neumann & Usha Nemani

Reviewer: Please change the author list here and in `_data/authors.yml` to "Usha Nemani & Marco Neumann" (primary author goes first):

```suggestion
author: Usha Nemani & Marco Neumann
```

The whole beauty of cube does not come from storing multiple datasets,
but especially from retrieving the data  (**Querying**)  in a very comfortable way. 
Kartothek views the whole cube as a large, virtual DataFrame.

## What is a Cube?
Kartothek Cube deals with multiple Kartothek datasets, loosely modeled after [Data Cubes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_cube).

Let us start with building the cube for **geodata**. Similar to Kartothek, 
we need a [simplekv](https://simplekv.readthedocs.io/)-based store backend along with an abstract cube definition.

**df_weather** is a pandas dataframe created from reading a csv file.

```python
>>> from io import StringIO
>>> import pandas as pd
>>> df_weather = pd.read_csv(
...     filepath_or_buffer=StringIO("""
... avg_temp     city country        day
...        6  Hamburg      DE 2020-07-01
...        5  Hamburg      DE 2020-07-02
...        8  Dresden      DE 2020-07-01
...        4  Dresden      DE 2020-07-02
...        6   London      UK 2020-07-01
...        8   London      UK 2020-07-02
...     """.strip()),
...     delim_whitespace=True,
...     parse_dates=["day"],
... )
```

```python

> >>>##we are creating a geodata cube instance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>># we are creating a geodata cube instance:
```

---
layout: single
title:  "Introducing Cube Functionality To Kartothek"
date:   2020-07-21 06:00:00 +0500
tags: technology python data-engineering
header:
  overlay_image: assets/images/tech_gear_banner.jpg
  overlay_filter: 0.2
  show_overlay_excerpt: false
author: Usha Nemani & Marco Neumann
author_profile: true
---
# Introducing Cube Functionality To Kartothek

Last year, we introduced [Kartothek](../introducing-kartothek/), a table management python library powered by Dask. 
Our journey continued by adding another gem to our open source treasure: We empowered Kartothek with multi-dataset functionality.
 
You might think: "Kartothek already provides dataset features, do I really need multiple dataset interfaces?" Hang on,
 we will present you the story of **Kartothek cubes**, an interface that supports multiple datasets. 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

There is no need for another paragraph.

Imagine a typical machine learning workflow, which might look like this:
* First, we get some input data, or source data. In the context of Kartothek cubes, we will refer to the source data as seed data or seed dataset.
* On this seed dataset, we might want to train a model that generates predictions.
* Based on these predicitons, we might want to generate reports and calculate KPIs.
* Last, but not least, we might want to create some dashboards showing plots of the aggregated KPIs as well as the underlying input data.

> What we need for this workflow is not a table-like view on our data, but a view on everything that we generated in these different steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What we need for this workflow is not a table-like view on our data, but a single (virtual) view on everything that we generated in these different steps.
```

That might make the contrast a little bit clearer.

 
Kartothek Cubes deals with multiple Kartothek datasets, loosely modeled after [Data Cubes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_cube).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This can be a single paragraph.

Cubes offer an interface to query all of the data without performing complex join operations manually each time. 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Same paragraph.

> Because kartothek offers a view on our cube as a large virtual pandas DataFrame, querying the whole dataset is very comfortable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because kartothek offers a view on our cube similar to large virtual pandas DataFrame, querying the whole dataset is very comfortable.
```

"as a" somewhat implies that the functionality / interface is modeled after the pandas DataFrame, which is not true (Dask.DataFrame for example does this though)

## How to use Cubes?

Let us start with building the cube for **geodata**. Similar to Kartothek, 
we need a [simplekv](https://simplekv.readthedocs.io/)-based store backend along with an abstract cube definition.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Single paragraph.

> **df_weather** is a pandas dataframe created from reading a csv file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**df_weather** is a pandas dataframe created from reading a csv file:
```

```python
>>> from io import StringIO
>>> import pandas as pd
>>> df_weather = pd.read_csv(
...     filepath_or_buffer=StringIO("""
... avg_temp     city country        day
...        6  Hamburg      DE 2020-07-01
...        5  Hamburg      DE 2020-07-02
...        8  Dresden      DE 2020-07-01
...        4  Dresden      DE 2020-07-02
...        6   London      UK 2020-07-01
...        8   London      UK 2020-07-02
...     """.strip()),
...     delim_whitespace=True,
...     parse_dates=["day"],
... )
```

Now, we want to store this dataframe using the cube interface.

>  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Single paragraph.

To achieve this, we have to specify the cube object first by providing some meta-information about our data.
The `uuid_prefix` serves as identifier for our dataset. The `dimension_columns` are the dataset's primary keys, so all rows within this datset have to be unique with respect to the `dimension_columns`.
The `partition_columns` specify the columns which are used to physically partition the dataset.

```python
>>>#we are creating a geodata cube instance
>>> from kartothek.core.cube.cube import Cube
>>> cube = Cube(
...     uuid_prefix="geodata",
...     dimension_columns=["city", "day"],
...     partition_columns=["country"]
...)
```

We use the simple **kartothek.io.eager_cube** backend to store the data:

```python
>>> from kartothek.io.eager_cube import build_cube
>>> datasets_build = build_cube(
...   data=df_weather,
...   store=store,
...   cube=cube
...)
```

where **store** is the **simplekv** store of storefactory. (For more details, please refer our [Kartothek](2019-05-28-introducing-kartothek.markdown) post.)

> We have just preserved a single Kartothek dataset. Let's print the content of seed dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have just preserved a single Kartothek dataset. Let's print the content of seed dataset:
```

geodata++transformed/table/country=DE/<uuid>.parquet
geodata++transformed/table/country=UK/<uuid>.parquet
geodata++transformed/table/country=UK/<uuid>.parquet
```

## Append
New rows can be added to the cube using an append operation.

```python
>>> from kartothek.io.eager_cube import append_to_cube
>>> df_weather2 = pd.read_csv(
...     filepath_or_buffer=StringIO("""
... avg_temp     city country        day
...       20 Santiago      CL 2020-07-01
...       22 Santiago      CL 2020-07-02
...     """.strip()),
...     delim_whitespace=True,
...     parse_dates=["day"],
... )
>>> datasets_appended = append_to_cube(
...   data=df_weather2,
...   store=store,
...   cube=cube,
... )
>>> print_filetree(store, "geodata++seed")
geodata++seed.by-dataset-metadata.json
geodata++seed/indices/city/<ts>.by-dataset-index.parquet
geodata++seed/indices/city/<ts>.by-dataset-index.parquet
geodata++seed/indices/day/<ts>.by-dataset-index.parquet
geodata++seed/indices/day/<ts>.by-dataset-index.parquet
geodata++seed/table/_common_metadata
geodata++seed/table/country=CL/<uuid>.parquet
geodata++seed/table/country=DE/<uuid>.parquet
geodata++seed/table/country=UK/<uuid>.parquet
```

> Notice that the indices where updated automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indices are updated automatically. If we query the data now, we can see that only the seed dataset got updated but the additional columns are missing:
```

The example below does not describe anything index-specific but is a great example for the left-join semantic

... )[0]
   avg_temp      city country        day   latitude  longitude
0         8   Dresden      DE 2020-07-01  51.050407  13.737262
1         4   Dresden      DE 2020-07-02  51.050407  13.737262
2         6   Hamburg      DE 2020-07-01  53.551086   9.993682
3         5   Hamburg      DE 2020-07-02  53.551086   9.993682
4         6    London      UK 2020-07-01        NaN        NaN
5         8    London      UK 2020-07-02        NaN        NaN
6        20  Santiago      CL 2020-07-01        NaN        NaN
7        22  Santiago      CL 2020-07-02        NaN        NaN
```

## Cube Features in Kartothek

*	**Multiple-datasets**: When mapping multiple parts (tables or datasets) to Kartothek, using multiple datasets allow users to copy, backup and delete them separately.
 Index structures are bound to datasets. This was not possible with the existing multi-table (within a single dataset) feature present in kartothek.
 We intend to phase out the multi-table single dataset functionality soon.

*	**Seed-Based Join System / Partition-alignment**: When data is stored in multiple parts (tables or datasets), the question is how to expose it to the user during read operations.

>  Seed-based join marks a single part as seed which provides seed dataset in the cube, all other parts are just additional columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Seed-based join marks a single part as ground-truth which provides the row set present in the cube, all other parts are just additional columns.
```

You're explaining "seed" with "seed" otherwise.

>  Cube uses lazy approach of seed based join, since it better supports independent copies and backups of datasets and also simplifies some of our processing pipelines

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Cubes use a lazy approach for joins, since it better supports independent copies and backups of datasets and also simplifies some of our processing pipelines
```

 (e.g. geolocation data can blindly be fetched for too many locations and dates.)	

## Outlook

> In the upcoming months we’ll continue to expand the Kartothek functionality. Here are a few highlights of what's next:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the upcoming months we will continue to expand the Kartothek functionality. Here are a few highlights of what's next:
```

My fault, the short form shouldn't be used for official blog posts.

- **API cleanup:** The API surface of kartothek grew organically over the years and we plan to re-design it. 
While doing so, we will incorporate our learnings regarding API design and will also prune some features that are not needed anymore or that did not match their expectations (e.g. the original multi-table design).
- **Ecosystem integration:** At this point in time, there are multiple dataset formats (e.g. [Apache Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/dataset.html), 
[Apache Iceberg](https://iceberg.apache.org/), [Delta Lake](https://delta.io/)) and we will investigate how to evolve kartothek as a library and as a format to align better with the ecosystem and enable new features (like schema migrations and time travel), 

> while providing the stability and safety that our users require.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
while providing the stability and safety that our users demand.
```

> - **Query Planning:** Currently the kartothek query planner solely relies on file-level information (file names for primary indices and separate index files for secondary indices). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Query Planning:** Currently the kartothek query planner solely relies on file-level information (via file names for primary indices and separate index files for secondary indices). 
```

> It would be great to also use the RowGroup-level statistics as specified in [Apache Parquet](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format) to improve query performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It would be great to also use the RowGroup-level statistics as specified by [Apache Parquet](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format) to improve query performance.
```

---
layout: single
title:  "Introducing Cube Functionality To Kartothek"
date:   2020-07-21 06:00:00 +0500
tags: technology python data-engineering
header:
  overlay_image: assets/images/tech_gear_banner.jpg
  overlay_filter: 0.2
  show_overlay_excerpt: false
author: Usha Nemani & Marco Neumann
author_profile: true
---
# Introducing Cube Functionality To Kartothek

Last year, we introduced [Kartothek](../introducing-kartothek/), a table management python library powered by Dask. 
Our journey continued by adding another gem to our open source treasure: We empowered Kartothek with multi-dataset functionality.
 

> You might think: "Kartothek already provides Dataset features, as a user do I really need multiple datasets?" Hang on,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You might think: "Kartothek already provides dataset features, do I really need multiple dataset interfaces?" Hang on,
```

>  we will present you the story of **Cubes (kartothek that supports multiple datasets)**. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 we will present you the story of **Kartothek cubes**, an interface that supports multiple datasets. 
```

Reviewer 2: I would personally use the non-capitalized version, feels prettier to read.

Imagine a typical machine learning workflow, which might look like this:

> * First, we get some input data, or source data. In this context, we will refer to the source data as seed data or seed dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* First, we get some input data, or source data. In the context of Kartothek cubes, we will refer to the source data as seed data or seed dataset.
```

## Extend Operation

Now let’s say we also would like to have longitude and latitude data in our cube.

```python
>>> from kartothek.io.eager_cube import extend_cube
>>> df_location = pd.read_csv(
...     filepath_or_buffer=StringIO("""
...    city country  latitude  longitude
... Hamburg      DE 53.551086   9.993682
... Dresden      DE 51.050407  13.737262
...  London      UK 51.509865  -0.118092
...   Tokyo      JP 35.652832 139.839478
...     """.strip()),
...     delim_whitespace=True,
... )
```

```python
>>> datasets_extend = extend_cube(
...   data={"latlong": df_location},
...   store=store,
...   cube=cube,
... )
```

This results in an extra dataset:

```python
>>> print(", ".join(sorted(datasets_extend.keys())))
latlong
>>> ds_latlong = datasets_extend["latlong"].load_all_indices(store)
>>> print(ds_latlong.uuid)
geodata++latlong
>>> print(", ".join(sorted(ds_latlong.indices)))
country
```
Note that for the second dataset, no indices for **city** and **day** exist. 
These are only created for the seed dataset, since that dataset forms the groundtruth about which `city-day` entries are part of the cube.

> (Dataset that provides the groundtruth about which Cells are in the cube is called the **seed dataset**).

Reviewer 2: I would just delete the sentence in l. 162, it is somehow redundant

Author: have removed above line.

>>> dfs = query_cube(
...     cube=cube,
...     store=store,
...     partition_by="country",
... )
>>> dfs[0]
   avg_temp     city country        day   latitude  longitude
0         8  Dresden      DE 2020-07-01  51.050407  13.737262
1         4  Dresden      DE 2020-07-02  51.050407  13.737262
2         6  Hamburg      DE 2020-07-01  53.551086   9.993682
3         5  Hamburg      DE 2020-07-02  53.551086   9.993682
>>> dfs[1]
   avg_temp    city country        day   latitude  longitude
0         6  London      UK 2020-07-01  51.509865  -0.118092
1         8  London      UK 2020-07-02  51.509865  -0.118092
```

The query system also supports selection and projection:

```python
>>> from kartothek.core.cube.conditions import C
>>> from kartothek.io.eager_cube import query_cube
>>> query_cube(
...     cube=cube,
...     store=store,
...     payload_columns=["avg_temp"],
...     conditions=(
...         (C("country") == "DE") &
...         C("latitude").in_interval(50., 52.) &
...         C("longitude").in_interval(13., 14.)
...     ),
... )[0]
   avg_temp     city country        day
0         8  Dresden      DE 2020-07-01
1         4  Dresden      DE 2020-07-02
```

 
## Transform

> Query and Extend can be combined to build powerful transformation pipelines. To better illustrate this we will use **dask.bag_cube** for the example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Query and extend operations can be combined to build powerful transformation pipelines. To better illustrate this we will use **dask.bag_cube** for the example.
```

geodata++seed/indices/day/<ts>.by-dataset-index.parquet
geodata++seed/table/_common_metadata
geodata++seed/table/country=CL/<uuid>.parquet
geodata++seed/table/country=DE/<uuid>.parquet
geodata++seed/table/country=UK/<uuid>.parquet
```
Notice that the indices where updated automatically.

```python
>>> query_cube(
...     cube=cube,
...     store=store,
... )[0]
   avg_temp  avg_temp_country_min      city country        day   latitude  longitude
0         8                   6.0   Dresden      DE 2020-07-01  51.050407  13.737262
1         4                   4.0   Dresden      DE 2020-07-02  51.050407  13.737262
2         6                   6.0   Hamburg      DE 2020-07-01  53.551086   9.993682
3         5                   4.0   Hamburg      DE 2020-07-02  53.551086   9.993682
4         6                   6.0    London      UK 2020-07-01  51.509865  -0.118092
5         8                   4.0    London      UK 2020-07-02  51.509865  -0.118092
6        20                   NaN  Santiago      CL 2020-07-01        NaN        NaN
7        22                   NaN  Santiago      CL 2020-07-02        NaN        NaN
 
```

## Remove and Delete Operations

> You can **Remove** entire partitions from the cube using the remove operation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can **remove** entire partitions from the cube using the remove operation.
```

```python
>>> from kartothek.io.eager_cube import remove_partitions
>>> datasets_after_removal = remove_partitions(
...     cube=cube,
...     store=store,
...     ktk_cube_dataset_ids=["latlong"],
...     conditions=(C("country") == "UK"),
... )
>>> query_cube(
...     cube=cube,
...     store=store,
... )[0]
   avg_temp  avg_temp_country_min      city country        day   latitude  longitude
0         8                   6.0   Dresden      DE 2020-07-01  51.050407  13.737262
1         4                   4.0   Dresden      DE 2020-07-02  51.050407  13.737262
2         6                   6.0   Hamburg      DE 2020-07-01  53.551086   9.993682
3         5                   4.0   Hamburg      DE 2020-07-02  53.551086   9.993682
4         6                   6.0    London      UK 2020-07-01        NaN        NaN
5         8                   4.0    London      UK 2020-07-02        NaN        NaN
6        20                   NaN  Santiago      CL 2020-07-01        NaN        NaN
7        22                   NaN  Santiago      CL 2020-07-02        NaN        NaN 
```

> You can also **Delete** entire datasets (or the entire cube).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also **delete** entire datasets (or the entire cube).
```

```python
>>> from kartothek.io.eager_cube import delete_cube
>>> datasets_still_in_cube = delete_cube(
...     cube=cube,
...     store=store,
...     datasets=["transformed"],
... )
>>> query_cube(
...     cube=cube,
...     store=store,
... )[0]
   avg_temp      city country        day   latitude  longitude
0         8   Dresden      DE 2020-07-01  51.050407  13.737262
1         4   Dresden      DE 2020-07-02  51.050407  13.737262
2         6   Hamburg      DE 2020-07-01  53.551086   9.993682
3         5   Hamburg      DE 2020-07-02  53.551086   9.993682
4         6    London      UK 2020-07-01        NaN        NaN
5         8    London      UK 2020-07-02        NaN        NaN
6        20  Santiago      CL 2020-07-01        NaN        NaN
7        22  Santiago      CL 2020-07-02        NaN        NaN
```

## Cube Features in Kartothek

*	**Multiple-datasets**: When mapping multiple parts (tables or datasets) to Kartothek, using multiple datasets allow users to copy, backup and delete them separately.

>  Index structures are bound to datasets.This was not possible with the existing multi-table (within a single dataset) feature present in kartothek.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 Index structures are bound to datasets. This was not possible with the existing multi-table (within a single dataset) feature present in kartothek.
```

---
layout: single
title:  "Introducing Cube Functionality To Kartothek"
date:   2020-07-21 06:00:00 +0500
tags: technology python data-engineering
header:
  overlay_image: assets/images/tech_gear_banner.jpg
  overlay_filter: 0.2
  show_overlay_excerpt: false
author: Marco Neumann & Usha Nemani
author_profile: true
---
# Introducing Cube Functionality To Kartothek

In our last blog we introduced [Kartothek](2019-05-28-introducing-kartothek.markdown), a table management python library powered by Dask. 
Our journey continued by adding a gem to our jewel. We empowered Kartothek with multiple-dataset functionality. 
Kartothek already provides Dataset features, As a user do I really need a multiple-dataset? Hang On!! 

> Let us spend rest of our time understanding the story of **Cube (kartothek that supports multiple datasets)**. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we present the story of **Cubes (kartothek that supports multiple datasets)**. 
```

## What is a Cube?
A Cube deals with multiple Kartothek datasets.

Let us start with building a cube for **geodata**. Similar to Kartothek, 

> we need a [simplekv](https://simplekv.readthedocs.io/)-based store backend along with an abstract cube definition.

Reviewer 3: I think we should start with a short paragraph describing what we refer to as a cube and also separate our usage of the term from the more commonly used OLAP cube. Diving straight into the example might leave users confused / not knowing what to expect

Reviewer: I would however not get to theoretical / deep-diving at this point, since I think an example-based explanation is easier to follow. (not saying that 1-2 sentences would be misplaced here)

Author: Added URL to `Data Cube`, in `what is a cube` section.

**df_weather** is a pandas dataframe created from reading a csv file.

```python

> >>> from io import StringIO

Reviewer: ```python
>>> import pandas as pd
```

is missing

Author: updated.

>>> df_weather = pd.read_csv(
...     filepath_or_buffer=StringIO("""
... avg_temp     city country        day
...        6  Hamburg      DE 2018-01-01
...        5  Hamburg      DE 2018-01-02
...        8  Dresden      DE 2018-01-01
...        4  Dresden      DE 2018-01-02
...        6   London      UK 2018-01-01
...        8   London      UK 2018-01-02

> ...     """.strip()),

Reviewer 3: Why use a CSV string to define the dataframe? I would suggest to use a plain dataframe definition using dicts/lists/etc. that's a bit more friendly imo

Reviewer: Depends, I found this easier to read than `pd.DataFrame({"x": ..., "y": ...})`, but if you suggest a nice, readable in-code variant, that would of course be better :)

...     delim_whitespace=True,
...     parse_dates=["day"],
... )
```

```python
>>> from kartothek.core.cube.cube import Cube

> >>>##we are creating a geodata cube instance

Reviewer: This comment should come before the the code example

Author: updated.

>>> cube = Cube(
...     uuid_prefix="geodata",

> ...     dimension_columns=["city", "day"],

Reviewer 3: I think at this point (or above in an introduction section). The dimension columns can be motivated since this is a quite central concept in KLEE. without this introduction this feels a bit random

Author: Updated Introduction with above steps.
Added some content on dimension_columns

...     partition_columns=["country"]
...)
```

We use the simple **kartothek.io.eager_cube** backend to store the data:

```python
>>> from kartothek.io.eager_cube import build_cube
>>> datasets_build = build_cube(
...   data=df_weather,
...   store=store,
...   cube=cube
...)
```

> where **store** is the **simplekv** store of storefactory. (For more details, please refer our [Kartothek](2019-05-28-introducing-kartothek.markdown) blog.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where **store** is the **simplekv** store of storefactory. (For more details, please refer our [Kartothek](2019-05-28-introducing-kartothek.markdown) post.)
```

A blog is the entire website / collection, a post refers to a single entry / story.

> We just have preserved a single Kartothek dataset. Lets print the content of seed dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We just have preserved a single Kartothek dataset. Let's print the content of seed dataset.
```

```python
>>> print(", ".join(sorted(datasets_build.keys())))
seed
>>> ds_seed = datasets_build["seed"].load_all_indices(store)
>>> print(ds_seed.uuid)
geodata++seed
>>> print(", ".join(sorted(ds_seed.indices)))
city, country, day
```

> Finally, let’s have a quick look at the store content. Note that we cut out UUIDs and timestamps here for documentation purposes:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, let’s have a quick look at the store content. Note that we cut out UUIDs and timestamps here for brevity:
```

> Finally, let’s have a quick look at the store content. Note that we cut out UUIDs and timestamps here for documentation purposes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we have a quick look at the store content. Note that we cut out UUIDs and timestamps here for documentation purposes:
```

It's not "finally" since it is not the last section of the post.

Author: Updated.

```python
>>> import re
>>> def print_filetree(s, prefix=""):
...     entries = []
...     for k in sorted(s.keys(prefix)):
...         k = re.sub("[a-z0-9]{32}", "<uuid>", k)
...         k = re.sub("[0-9]{4}-[0-9]{2}-[0-9]{2}((%20)|(T))[0-9]{2}%3A[0-9]{2}%3A[0-9]+.[0-9]{6}", "<ts>", k)
...         entries.append(k)
...     print("\n".join(sorted(entries)))
>>> print_filetree(store)
geodata++seed.by-dataset-metadata.json
geodata++seed/indices/city/<ts>.by-dataset-index.parquet
geodata++seed/indices/day/<ts>.by-dataset-index.parquet
geodata++seed/table/_common_metadata
geodata++seed/table/country=DE/<uuid>.parquet
geodata++seed/table/country=UK/<uuid>.parquet
```

> Thus, A cube can be visualised as a metadataset of multiple datasets as shown in below image.

Reviewer 3: We don't really use the term _metadataset_ anywhere in the documentation, do we? I think I would prefer something simpler like "a collection of datasets" since the _meta_ prefix is quite heavily loaded in kartothek with various different meanings

Author: Updated.

> Thus, A cube can be visualised as a metadataset of multiple datasets as shown in below image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus a cube can be visualised as a metadataset of multiple datasets as shown in below image.
```

 
 
![Cube Image](/assets/images/2020-07-21-kartothek-cube.png)

> Similarly, we can **Extend** this cube by **Adding** new columns to the dataframes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, we can **extend** this cube by adding new columns to the dataframes.
```

## Extend Operation

Now let’s say we also would like to have longitude and latitude data in our cube.

```python
>>> from kartothek.io.eager_cube import extend_cube
>>> df_location = pd.read_csv(
...     filepath_or_buffer=StringIO("""
...    city country  latitude  longitude
... Hamburg      DE 53.551086   9.993682
... Dresden      DE 51.050407  13.737262
...  London      UK 51.509865  -0.118092
...   Tokyo      JP 35.652832 139.839478
...     """.strip()),
...     delim_whitespace=True,
... )
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python
```

>>> ds_latlong = datasets_extend["latlong"].load_all_indices(store)
>>> print(ds_latlong.uuid)
geodata++latlong
>>> print(", ".join(sorted(ds_latlong.indices)))
country
```
Note that for the second dataset, no indices for **city** and **day** exists. 
These are only created for the seed dataset, since that datasets forms the groundtruth about which city-day entries are part of the cube.
(Dataset that provides the groundtruth about which Cells are in a Cube is called the **seed dataset**).

If you look at the file tree, you can see that the second dataset is completely separated. This is useful to copy/backup parts of the cube:

```python
>>> print_filetree(store)
geodata++latlong.by-dataset-metadata.json
geodata++latlong/table/_common_metadata
geodata++latlong/table/country=DE/<uuid>.parquet
geodata++latlong/table/country=JP/<uuid>.parquet
geodata++latlong/table/country=UK/<uuid>.parquet
geodata++seed.by-dataset-metadata.json
geodata++seed/indices/city/<ts>.by-dataset-index.parquet
geodata++seed/indices/day/<ts>.by-dataset-index.parquet
geodata++seed/table/_common_metadata
geodata++seed/table/country=DE/<uuid>.parquet
geodata++seed/table/country=UK/<uuid>.parquet
```
## Query

> The whole beauty of Cube does not come from storing multiple datasets,

Author: Done.

but especially from retrieving the data  (**Querying**)  in a very comfortable way. 

> Kartothek views the whole cube as a large, virtual DataFrame.

Reviewer 3: I believe this should be somewhere at the beginning of the blog posts. In the end this is the motivation for everything and tells the user "hey, this is why you are here. this is why you should bother reading this blog post"

Author: Moved this block to beginning of the post.

The seed dataset presents the groundtruth regarding rows, all other datasets are joined via a left join. 

> Cube naturally supports **partition-by** semantic, which is more helpful for distributed backends.

Reviewer 3: Do we want to put an emphasise on this feature? We have this feature in plain kartothek as well with a different name. imho, this is not absolutely required to motivate the usage of this

Reviewer: At least for the transformation section (see the other thread about this) I think this would be worth to mention.

Author: removed above lines.

> Cube naturally supports **partition-by** semantic, which is more helpful for distributed backends.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cubes naturally support **partition-by** semantics, which is especially helpful for distributed backends.
```

0         8  Dresden      DE 2020-07-01  51.050407  13.737262
1         4  Dresden      DE 2020-07-02  51.050407  13.737262
2         6  Hamburg      DE 2020-07-01  53.551086   9.993682
3         5  Hamburg      DE 2020-07-02  53.551086   9.993682
>>> dfs[1]
   avg_temp    city country        day   latitude  longitude
0         6  London      UK 2020-07-01  51.509865  -0.118092
1         8  London      UK 2020-07-02  51.509865  -0.118092
```

The query system also supports selection and projection:

```python
>>> from kartothek.core.cube.conditions import C
>>> from kartothek.io.eager_cube import query_cube
>>> query_cube(
...     cube=cube,
...     store=store,
...     payload_columns=["avg_temp"],
...     conditions=(
...         (C("country") == "DE") &
...         C("latitude").in_interval(50., 52.) &
...         C("longitude").in_interval(13., 14.)
...     ),
... )[0]
   avg_temp     city country        day
0         8  Dresden      DE 2020-07-01
1         4  Dresden      DE 2020-07-02
```

 
## Transform

Query and Extend can be combined to build powerful transformation pipelines. To better illustrate this we will use **dask.bag_cube** for that example.

> 

Reviewer 3: Is this really a feature of kartothek? We effectively only load data, what follows is dask. That topic feels like it would suit into another blog post, e.g. "how can you use kartothek to power ETL pipelines" or something more snappy

Reviewer: The query planner and the modular split-map-reduce schema was one of the fundamental design goals of the cube functionality.

5         8                   4.0    London      UK 2018-01-02        NaN        NaN
6        20                   NaN  Santiago      CL 2018-01-01        NaN        NaN
7        22                   NaN  Santiago      CL 2018-01-02        NaN        NaN 
```

You can also **Delete** entire datasets (or the entire cube).

```python
>>> from kartothek.io.eager_cube import delete_cube
>>> datasets_still_in_cube = delete_cube(
...     cube=cube,
...     store=store,
...     datasets=["transformed"],
... )
>>> query_cube(
...     cube=cube,
...     store=store,
... )[0]
   avg_temp      city country        day   latitude  longitude
0         8   Dresden      DE 2018-01-01  51.050407  13.737262
1         4   Dresden      DE 2018-01-02  51.050407  13.737262
2         6   Hamburg      DE 2018-01-01  53.551086   9.993682
3         5   Hamburg      DE 2018-01-02  53.551086   9.993682
4         6    London      UK 2018-01-01        NaN        NaN
5         8    London      UK 2018-01-02        NaN        NaN
6        20  Santiago      CL 2018-01-01        NaN        NaN
7        22  Santiago      CL 2018-01-02        NaN        NaN
```

> ## Additional Features of Cube

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Cube Features in Karotothek
```

("Additional" always refers to some baseline and at least to me it's not clear which state/baseline you're referring to).

> *	**Multiple-datasets**: This was not possible with the existing multi-table (within a single dataset) feature present in kartothek.

Reviewer: Please swap the first and the second sentence, otherwise the reader might be confused about what exactly was not possible with the multi-table approach.

Author: Updated.

>  When mapping multiple parts (tables or datasets) to Kartothek, using multiple datasets allows users to copy, backup and delete them separately. Index structures are bound to datasets.

Reviewer 3: I believe we can/should also add to this blog post that we intend to phase out the multi-table single dataset functionality

Reviewer: This is part of the outlook, but we can make it more prominent there.

Author: I added  `we intend to phase out the multi-table single dataset functionality`  this line in the  `multiple-datasets` feature. Please verify the flow.

*	**Seed-Based Join System / Partition-alignment**: When data is stored in multiple parts (tables or datasets), the question is how to expose it to the user during read operations.
 Seed based Join marks a single part as seed which provides seed dataset in the cube, all other parts are just additional columns.
 Cube uses lazy approach of seed based join, 
 since it better supports independent copies and backups of datasets and also simplifies some of our processing pipelines (e.g. geolocation data can blindly be fetched for too many locations and dates.)	

## Command Line Interface (CLI)
Kartothek features a **command line interface (CLI)** for some cube operations. 
To use it, create a  **skv.yml** file that describes [storefact](https://github.com/JDASoftwareGroup/storefact) stores and use commands to gather information of the required cube.

Sample skv.yml:
```
dataset:
   type: hfs
   path: path/to/data
```

Here we use **geodata** cube to get some information.
```shell
kartothek_cube geodata info  #gives geodata cube info
kartothek_cube geodata stats  #for cube scan
kartothek_cube --help  #To get list of  ktk_cube commands
```

## Outlook

> - **API cleanup:** The API surface of kartothek grow organically over the years and we plan to re-design it. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **API cleanup:** The API surface of kartothek grew organically over the years and we plan to re-design it. 
```

city, country, day
```

Finally, let’s have a quick look at the store content. Note that we cut out UUIDs and timestamps here for documentation purposes:

```python
>>> import re
>>> def print_filetree(s, prefix=""):
...     entries = []
...     for k in sorted(s.keys(prefix)):
...         k = re.sub("[a-z0-9]{32}", "<uuid>", k)
...         k = re.sub("[0-9]{4}-[0-9]{2}-[0-9]{2}((%20)|(T))[0-9]{2}%3A[0-9]{2}%3A[0-9]+.[0-9]{6}", "<ts>", k)
...         entries.append(k)
...     print("\n".join(sorted(entries)))
>>> print_filetree(store)
geodata++seed.by-dataset-metadata.json
geodata++seed/indices/city/<ts>.by-dataset-index.parquet
geodata++seed/indices/day/<ts>.by-dataset-index.parquet
geodata++seed/table/_common_metadata
geodata++seed/table/country=DE/<uuid>.parquet
geodata++seed/table/country=UK/<uuid>.parquet
```

Thus, A cube can be visualised as a metadataset of multiple datasets as shown in below image.
 
 
![Cube Image](/assets/images/2020-07-21-kartothek-cube.png)

Similarly, we can **Extend** this cube by **Adding** new columns to the dataframes.

## Extend Operation

Now let’s say we also would like to have longitude and latitude data in our cube.

```python

> >>> from klee2.io.eager import extend_cube

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>> from kartothek.io.eager_cube import extend_cube
```

Author: Updated in the markdown file.

```

Here we use **geodata** cube to get some information.

> ```shell

Reviewer: I only meant to change THIS particular occurrence. The other examples are Python code.

Author: done.

1         4  Dresden      DE 2020-07-02
```

 
Similarly, we can **Transform** the cube using **query** and **extend** operations,
 **Append** new rows to the existing cube.
 
## Remove and Delete Operations

You can **Remove** entire partitions from the cube using the remove operation.

```python

> >>> from klee2.io.eager import remove_partitions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>> from kartothek.io.eager_cube import remove_partitions
```

Author: Updated in the markdown file.

>>> datasets_after_removal = remove_partitions(
...     cube=cube,
...     store=store,
...     klee_dataset_ids=["latlong"],
...     conditions=(C("country") == "UK"),
... )
>>> query_cube(
...     cube=cube,
...     store=store,
... )[0]
   avg_temp  avg_temp_country_min      city country        day   latitude  longitude
0         8                   6.0   Dresden      DE 2018-01-01  51.050407  13.737262
1         4                   4.0   Dresden      DE 2018-01-02  51.050407  13.737262
2         6                   6.0   Hamburg      DE 2018-01-01  53.551086   9.993682
3         5                   4.0   Hamburg      DE 2018-01-02  53.551086   9.993682
4         6                   6.0    London      UK 2018-01-01        NaN        NaN
5         8                   4.0    London      UK 2018-01-02        NaN        NaN
6        20                   NaN  Santiago      CL 2018-01-01        NaN        NaN
7        22                   NaN  Santiago      CL 2018-01-02        NaN        NaN 
```

You can also **Delete** entire datasets (or the entire cube).

```python

> >>> from klee2.io.eager import delete_cube

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>> from kartothek.io.eager_cube import delete_cube
```

Author: Updated in the markdown file.
